TW edits, flow concept (#13200)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/concepts/flows.md

    - scripts
    - parameters
    - states
search:
  boost: 2
---

# Prefect flows

This page explains Prefect flows and how to build and manage them.

## Overview

Flows are the core building blocks for defining and managing workflows as code within Prefect. They serve as containers for your workflow logic and provide features for configuration and tracking.

Flows are Python functions decorated with the `@flow` decorator.

### Flow components

Flow components can include:

* **Flow functions:** Python functions that define the core logic of your workflows.
* [**Parameters**](#parameters): Inputs you pass to the flow function during execution.
* **Tasks:** Smaller units of work within a flow. For more information, see [tasks](/concepts/tasks/).
* [**Subflows**](#create-modular-workflows-using-subflows): Flows that you call from within another flow. Can contain multiple tasks.
* [**Flow run**](#flow-runs): A single execution of a flow.

### Flow benefits

> Using Prefect flows offer several advantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Prefect flows offers several advantages:
```

| `flow_run_name`                                    | Optional template string to define the name for flow runs. Can reference flow parameters or use a function. For example, you can use the `{name}-on-{date:%A}` value for dynamic flow run naming|
| `task_runner`                                      | Optional task runner to use for task execution within the flow. Defaults to `ConcurrentTaskRunner`.|
| `timeout_seconds`                                  | Optional maximum runtime (in seconds) for the flow. If exceeded, the flow is marked as failed.|
| `validate_parameters`                              | Boolean indicating whether to validate flow parameters using Pydantic (`default: True`). Where possible, Prefect forces values into the correct type. For example, if you define a parameter as `x: int` and "5" is passed, it resolves to `5`.|
| `version`                                          | Optional version string for the flow. Defaults to a hash of the file containing the wrapped function. If the file cannot be found, the `version` value is `null`. |

### Examples

> The following examples show how to customize certain flow behaviors.

Reviewer: I interpret "behavior" to mean the way that my flow runs. While the task runner changes the flow's behavior by the definition, the description and flow_run_name are not so much behavior changes as they are record keeping changes.

    my_flow(name="marvin")
```

## Flow runs
A flow run represents a single execution of a flow. 

![Prefect UI](/img/ui/timeline-flows.png)

### Triggering flow runs

You can trigger a flow run in several ways:

* **Manually:** Calling the flow function directly in a script or interactive session.
* **Scheduler:** Using external schedulers like `cron` to invoke the flow function periodically.

> * **Prefect Cloud/Server:** Creating [deployments](/concepts/deployments/) on Prefect Cloud or a locally run Prefect server. You can then schedule flow runs through the UI, API, or deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Prefect Cloud/Server:** Creating [deployments](/concepts/deployments/) on Prefect Cloud or a locally run Prefect server. You can then schedule flow runs through the UI, API, or SDK.
```

### Managing flow runs

Prefect provides functionalities for managing flow runs:

* **Monitoring:** The Prefect UI or API allows you to view the status, logs, and results of past and ongoing flow runs.
* **Retries:** You can set up flows to automatically retry a certain number of times on failure.
* **Cancelling:** You can manually cancel a running flow run if necessary.
* **Retention:** Prefect Cloud offers flow run retention policies to control how long to store flow runs after completion.

By effectively managing flow runs, you can ensure the smooth execution and maintainability of your workflows.

### Flow run states

Prefect tracks the state of each flow run, allowing you to monitor its progress and identify any issues. Here are the typical flow run states:

* **Scheduled:** The flow run is waiting for execution based on a schedule.
* **Running:** The flow and its tasks are actively executing.
* **Failed:** The flow run encountered an error and did not complete successfully.
* **Cancelled:** The flow run was manually stopped before completion.

> * **Succeeded:** The flow run finished execution without errors.

Reviewer: We do not have a Succeeded state.

> * **Succeeded:** The flow run finished execution without errors.

Reviewer: +1

## Create modular workflows using subflows

Subflows allow you to create modular units of work within your Prefect workflows. These subflows can contain multiple tasks, offering several advantages over using individual [tasks](/concepts/tasks/):

* **Enhanced observability**: Subflows have first-class observability within Prefect, providing clear visibility into their status within the UI and Prefect Cloud.  You can easily monitor subflow progress in the Flow Runs dashboard, eliminating the need to delve into individual tasks within a specific flow run. See [states](/concepts/states/) for examples utilizing task state within flows.

* **Conditional execution**: Subflows enable you to group tasks that only run under specific conditions. This simplifies conditional logic by allowing you to conditionally run the entire subflow instead of managing individual tasks.

> * **Parametrization**: Prefect's parameterization capabilities extend to subflows. This allows you to reuse the same group of tasks for different purposes by simply passing different parameters when invoking the subflow.

Reviewer: Throughout, sometimes the colon is included in the bolded text and sometimes not. Either is fine as long as its consistent.

* **Task runner flexibility**: Subflows provide control over the task runner used within them.  For example, you can group tasks optimized for parallel execution with Dask into a subflow that utilizes the Dask task runner.  Different subflows can leverage different task runners for optimal performance.

### Subflow execution

> Initiate a subflow run when you call a flow function inside another flow. The calling flow acts as the "parent" flow, while the created flow becomes the "child" or "subflow." The Prefect backend maintains a full visual representation of the subflow run, as if it were called directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A subflow run is initiated when you call a flow function inside another flow run. The calling flow acts as the "parent" flow, while the created flow becomes the "child" or "subflow." Prefect maintains a full visual representation of the subflow run, as if it were called directly.
```

```
</div>

## Monitor flows

To monitor flows, see [states](/concepts/states).

## Visualize flows

Calling `.visualize()` on your flow attempts to generate a visual representation (often a schematic diagram) of your flow and its tasks, without actually executing the flow code. This provides a quick and clear understanding of your flow structure and how tasks interact with each other.

### Important considerations

* Visualization without execution: Remember that `.visualize()` doesn't execute your flow's code. It solely focuses on structure visualization.
* Isolating code for visualization: Be cautious! Functions or code outside of flows or tasks are run when using `.visualize()`. This might cause unintended consequences. To prevent this, ensure your code resides within tasks.

### Prerequisites

[Install Graphviz](http://www.graphviz.org/download/) and make it accessible on your system path. Installing the `graphviz` python package using pip is not sufficient.

### Simple flow visualization

> This following code visualizes the below diagram:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visualizing the following code results in the below diagram:
```

    print(f"Hello, {user_input.name}!")
```

Running this flow creates a flow run. The flow run advances until code execution reaches `pause_flow_run`, at which point it moves into a `Paused` state.
Execution blocks and waits for resumption.

When resuming the flow run, users must provide a value for the `name` field of the `UserNameInput` model.
Upon successful validation, the flow run resumes, and the return value of the `pause_flow_run` is an instance of the `UserNameInput` model containing the provided data.

For more information on receiving input from users when pausing and suspending flow runs, see [Creating interactive workflows](/guides/creating-interactive-workflows/).

### Cancel flow runs

> Cancel a scheduled or in-progress flow run from the CLI, UI, REST API, or Python client to transition flow runs to a `Cancelling` state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A scheduled or in-progress flow run that is the entrypoint flow for a deployment can be cancelled from the CLI, UI, REST API, or Python client.
```

> How it works:

Reviewer 2: I would leave this section as is. I think the proposed changes don't capture the useful information. 

One change that would be good is saying that a deployment is required up front.

* Flow run infrastructure forcefully terminated if not stopped within the grace period (default 30 seconds).
* Requires a [deployment with the flow run](#deploy-flows-for-continuous-execution).
* Needs a monitoring process for enforcing cancellation.

### Worker restarts

Cancellations use the `infrastructure_pid` flow run metadata:

* Scope: Identifies where infrastructure is running (prevents killing wrong infrastructure).
* ID: Unique identifier for the infrastructure within the scope.

Example identifiers for infrastructure types:

- Processes: The machine hostname and the PID.
- Docker Containers: The Docker API URL and container ID.
- Kubernetes Jobs: The Kubernetes cluster name and the job name.

### Possible cancellation issues

* Altered/removed infrastructure block might prevent cancellation.
* Infrastructure block might not support cancellation.
* Mismatched identifier scope during cancellation attempt.
* Missing `infrastructure_pid`: Flow run marked cancelled, but enforcement fails.
* Unexpected worker error: Flow run cancellation might succeed or fail (worker retries).

### Improved cancellation (experimental)

> Improve cancellation reliability by enabling the `PREFECT_EXPERIMENTAL_ENABLE_ENHANCED_CANCELLATION` setting on your worker or agents:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Improve cancellation reliability by enabling the `PREFECT_EXPERIMENTAL_ENABLE_ENHANCED_CANCELLATION` setting on your worker:
```
